Hello,
good morning, is it still? Yes.
Yes.
Wonderful.
Just.
We've been here a while.
Welcome. In the interest of time, while everyone's getting themselves seated,
we're in public session for the bill on the
Health and Safety at Work Act.
Can we just ask that you have
10 minutes, and that includes time for questions, and take
the
report or your submission as read, and highlight what you like, and the time is
over to you.
Understood.
I'm ready to go.
Yes, please.
Great. Okay. Good morning. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank members of the committee for the opportunity to appear for Civil Contractors
New Zealand regarding Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill. I'm Fraser May.
I'm the communications and advocacy manager at CCNZ.
We're the National Association for Horizontal Construction.
And with me here today, I've got Managing Director of Pipeline and Civil, Mr.
Hugh Goddard.
Hi.
He's a CCNZ member. His business is primarily involved in construction and
maintenance of water networks, but he's also a board member of Construction Health
and Safety New Zealand and an independent director of roading company
Informax. So yeah, pretty good board experience.
CCNZ, we've got more than 800 member businesses and organizations responsible
for constructing and maintaining roads, water, energy, and more.
Our sector operates in high-risk environments,
underground tunnels, trenches, large machinery, live traffic
lanes, soil stabilization halfway up a cliff.
You name it, the members are out there doing it.
Our comments are pretty simple, really.
Reform should deliver genuine safety improvements, provide clarity
for duty holders, and be practical and workable across infrastructure
delivery at all scales.
We will have the submission as read.
I just wanted to focus on a couple of key points.
The cost of industry-- injuries, sorry, to business is very real and
has been projected in the billions annually.
But that's to the economy as well, and most of all to the workers who
experience the injuries. So I think, we've all got a stake in stopping that from
happening. We support the bill's objectives of clarifying and
streamlining health and safety obligations.
We do welcome emphasis on prioritizing critical risk,
but we feel that the proposals that have been put forward do not adequately capture
the risk, and we feel some changes are needed.
So risks, we do not feel, are dependent on business size.
So, the 20 work definition of a small PCBU
is not workable. We feel it's arbitrary, and it's not going to really
be applicable to construction settings.
Those businesses I talk to working halfway up a cliff, they are often
10 workers maybe. But they operate in some of the highest risk settings out
there, and they need to manage that.
We appreciate clear guidance on governance responsibilities, but we think a bit
more is needed, especially where an officer
holds a governance and an operational role within a business.
We need clarity on that. We need fair regulatory
responsibilities, and there needs to be strong accountability for upstream
clients. We can't put people at risk of injury to cut corners or cut
costs. Clients pay for the project, and they set the table for
success or failure. So having them say, "We don't play the health and safety game
with me," could put people at risk, and we can't have that happening.
Everyone's got a role to play. What we're asking for is robust, industry-connected
regulatory guidance and active consultation with our member
businesses to ensure the changes can be implemented effectively and
supported by practical codes of practice.
We'll leave time for questions, but I'm going to hand over to Hugh now for his
perspective and a couple of examples from the contractors' perspective.
Yeah. Thanks very much, Fraser. And hi, everyone.
So I guess, giving an example around the proposed PCBU
carve-out. So in our sector, risk doesn't change depending on whether the person
standing beside the trench or a live service or a piece of plant is employed by a
business with 15 workers or with 50. Risk is the same.
So the consequences if things go wrong are the same, so I think that's a key thing.
On a typical civil project, we may have a main contractor, specialist
subcontractors, labor-only teams, surveyors, traffic management, plant
operators, reinstatement teams, all working together.
And sometimes this equates to hundreds of people from different companies on-site
at any one time. So I guess the challenge is for a WorkSafe person going
into that site, how do they know if they're dealing with a PCBU that actually has
less than or greater than 20 workers?
And if the law applies differently depending on the size, it doesn't simplify site
management. In practice, the head contractor controlling the PCBU will still need
one common
standard across the site.
Mm-hmm.
So that's just going to create, instead of less bureaucracy,
it's going to create more administration, more headaches, I guess, and more
challenges and confusion.
I think we've covered off that small businesses doesn't equate to smaller risks.
Mm-hmm.
So I think that point was well made by Fraser.
And in critical risk, we certainly support direction
in principle, and I think the more important issue from a contractor's perspective
is defining
and making sure the critical controls are identified, understood, resourced,
monitored. That's where the rubber hits the road in terms of controls rather than
just identifying the risks, and that's what prevents catastrophic events from
occurring.
Obviously, in New Zealand, we don't have the kind of health and safety record that
justifies lowering the bar,
and we should be looking to raise standards,
not dilute them. The cost to harm is significant.
It's borne by the sector itself through disruption, reduced productivity, lost
capability, and poor outcomes for workers and families, but it's also borne more
widely through ACC and the public health system.
Mm-hmm.
So, I think there's a big challenge here.
And in my view, the pathway to a safer, more productive construction sector is
not to water down safety laws, to have a strong and well
resourced regulator, clear and practical guidance around what good looks like,
and an industry where expectations are consistent and
understood.And that will help create a future where work is done by
people who are safe, healthy, well-trained, properly qualified, more engaged,
and ultimately, more productive.
So the practical message really is the biggest opportunity here isn't to increase
complexity by creating a two-tier system of duties.
Let's create a system that is clear, more practical, and more useful for the people
actually delivering work on the ground.
So, our original submission to the MB consultation and subsequent discussions with
the minister call for clear guidance through ACOPS-
Mm
... and similar tools, and that remains unchanged. And thanks very much.
And looking forward to questions.
Thank you. Just a couple of quick questions from myself.
We've heard a lot about the carve-out for small business, but we have,
and not to just throw it out, we have heard from some that say that that is
incredibly helpful, like in farming, for example.
Mm.
Do you see a workable way where you could carve out industry rather
than size?
So, for example, we've heard from transport and from yourselves that you don't
see a differentiation between small and large for risk.
But yet there might be
small offices, like an accounting firm, where that small PCBU works.
Mm.
So do you see that working from your perspective?
I might set off on that one if I could here.
Yeah.
I think it does depend on the level of risk.
So absolutely, that might make sense for a dairy owner, to have less paperwork or
less unclear obligations. But what risks are they
facing, is the critical thing here.
So, if we're working in the top 10% of risk the whole time,
and pretty much every civil construction site out there will be-
Mm
... we need to manage that well. Whether that's, and how that's handled through the
legislation matters.
Mm.
I think, a blanket cutoff will be very difficult for us to
manage because it creates a double standard for people that are
working, and it's not really applicable.
Yeah. I'd also just add, I guess, around what we call risk amplifiers, so things
like fatigue, psychosocial harm-
Mm
... stress, all these sorts of factors are risk amplifiers.
So although you might be working around an excavator-
Mm
... that could kill you if something went wrong.
If that person's tired, subject to bullying, harassment, or whatever-
Mm
...
or fatigue or other sort of factors, that's going to
obviously influence the outcome.
And I think, having less focus on those risks and obviously musculoskeletal
is a big area as well.
Mm.
There's a significant challenge in the construction sector.
And by de-emphasizing the importance of businesses to manage those, you're creating
some challenges.
Yeah. Phil.
Just, I want to make sure I understand your main point, and thank you
for a very compelling submission.
But you seem to be, your argument, I think, if I hear you right, is
that the level of risk is unrelated to
the size-
Yeah
... of the enterprise or the number of employees. Is that right?
Correct.
So the PCBU cutoff, the
two-tier system that this bill creates-
Mm
...
doesn't pertain to actual risk. Is that right?
Correct.
Yeah.
So that's what I'm saying about having it carved out, industry rather than
size.
Yeah. I guess,
in your submission you say the committee should ensure the bill does not create a
legislative signal that these risks, that is the psychosocial risks outside
the critical risk definition, that these risks are secondary or optional,
but doesn't it, by definition, it's central to the concept of the whole
bill, that those risks are being deprioritized, aren't
they?
Well, I suppose you just take mental health as an example.
I'm not sure if I fully,
maybe you come back to your question-
Yeah
... to make sure I'm clear on it. But
we're losing a person a week to suicide in
construction.
Right.
So as a result of lots of factors.
Yep.
But obviously by de-emphasizing that for smaller businesses,
which actually the majority of, I know 90 plus percent of
construction businesses in New Zealand are small businesses by definition, and
probably fall-
Yeah
... largely within the criteria of less than 20.
We're
not addressing a massive issue that we've got and I think that's where the
challenge is that we need to
tackle.
Thank you. Question from Vanessa Wenick.
So in your submission, you highlight catastrophic risk.
Mm.
Can I just have an example of what you might mean by
catastrophic risk?
Explosion of a bitumen tanker.
Mm.
It's a very low likelihood of something like that happening.
But obviously the consequences are significant.
So by, I guess, how we capture and utilize the
word likelihood-
Okay
... in this case, needs to be expanded-
Yeah
... in the bills further.
Can I just-- So when you're doing a
risk analysis matrix, basically-
Yeah
... the likelihood and the outcomes are the kind of
thing. To me,
the
outcomes are the only things that have been focused on potentially in looking at
this and that schedule of whether it's death or injury
to eyes or those kind of things.
Whereas actually,
and then the likelihood of that happening creates a critical risk
rather than a catastrophic risk, which is probably
never happen. But if it does-
Mm
... holy crap, you know, sort of thing. Yes.
Yeah. That's it.
Yeah.
If we lose a fuel line to the Interislander or something, that's like-
So just one thing I wanted to raise was one thing that we do support, and we
probably didn't talk about this, and that is the role of WorkSafe and the
prioritization.
Mm-hmm.
I think
the problem we've got at the moment is that it's not entirely clear what people's
responsibilities are.
Mm.
Industry has guidance like bitumen burns cards or-
Mm
... bitumen safety handbooks.
Mm.
But getting WorkSafe to endorse those and say, "This is a reasonable
standard-
Yeah
... this is reasonably practicable," is
very, very difficult at the moment-
Correct. Mm
... to this stage. And that is what we really need.
Yeah.
And I think-
That's the role for them
... the way that the legislation has looked at that is
perhaps more spot on as long as WorkSafe's properly resourced and encouraged
to do that job, that that would support that.
Thank you. That is all the time we've got with you, but we found your submission
very helpful and-
Yeah. Thank you guys
... thank you for your time.
Thanks so much.
Thank you very much, Mia.
Thank you.
Wonderful.
Yes.
Perfect. We have now got Duane Leo, Tracey
Klenner, and Paula Warren from the Health Sector Committee of the
PSA.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes time for
questions, and the time is yours now. Over to you.
Tēnā koe chair and members of the committee.
Thank you for the chance for us to speak today on behalf of our members and the
union. My name is Duane Leo. I'm one of the national secretaries for the New
Zealand Public Service Association, and to my left, I have Tracey Klenner, who
is our health and safety lead, and I also have
Paula Warren, who's our PSA National Delegates Committee and also one of our
national delegates at DOC.
So you've received three submissions from different parts of the
PSA.
One overall submission, one from the members of our health and safety sector
committee, and one from the members of the PSA National Delegates Committee at
Department of Conservation. We have over 96,000 members working in all
parts of public and community services around the country.
That's a wide range of experiences and perspectives.
Our health and safety sector committee and the DOC National Delegates Committee
wanted to be here to share their perspectives on the bill with you, and we're
disappointed you don't have the opportunity to hear from them.
So in terms of the proposal, we have summary point one.
The PSA submits that the bill, as drafted, risks weakening worker
protections by narrowly focusing on critical risks and carving out
small PCBUs for core duties.
Mm.
So in terms of that, the bill's emphasis is narrow, and the definition of critical
risk could exclude high-frequency, everyday hazards,
multiskeletal injuries, slips, trips, falls,
workplace violence, and incidents that drive most ACC
costs and harm to workers.
Because of the poorly worded definition of critical risk, all PCBUs will
no longer have to prioritize risks that fall outside the definition
but can have quite significant health impacts.
A clear example of this would be where workers are exposed to a combination of
chemicals or hazardous substances that together cause
long-term health risks, for example, the likes of cancer.
These types of exposures are not captured by Schedule 2,
but are very common in instances with firefighters, lab
workers, wood processing, manufacturing.
All PCBUs would no longer have to prioritize managing these risks,
directly resulting in a less safe workplace.
Using the ACC occupational disease schedule to define critical health
risks is inappropriate and risks leaving important work-related
illnesses outside the scope of duty.
Thanks, Duane. Kia ora. I'm Tracey Klenner, as
Duane mentioned.
Our concern more broadly is with the problem with the small PCBU
carve-out. So, we believe this is exempting or
weakening duties for small PCBUs employing 20 or under
workers will create a two-tier health and safety system.
Fragmented accountability in shared workplaces and likely increase injuries.
All workers have the right to go home from work safe.
It shouldn't matter how small their workplace is.
It'll be workers and their families and ACC that will bear the cost of
these unmanaged risks. And as the union for people working in health and safety
regulation, we also submit that in workplaces where PCBUs have to
deal with both large and small organizations, this will create confusion and
enforcement difficulties if different standards apply.
So, if we look at this from the point of view of my workplace, Department of
Conservation,
most of our staff are working with people who are from small businesses.
So they're dealing with rural contractors, they're dealing with the
people who build huts,
who fix our cars, and they're going into other people's workplaces.
And what that means is that we will have to put a lot more cost and
effort into managing the risks that are faced by
our people working with those businesses.
Mm.
So there's not going to be an overall reduction in cost.
There's just going to be a higher confusion.
So when I have raised this issue with a health and safety manager, they have said,
"Well, everybody who comes into our workplace will have to comply with our laws."
That means that we will have to re-look at every contract,
including for concessionaires-
Mm
... who work on our lands. So, it's just going to be
very difficult to manage.
In addition, we have concerns about the approved codes of practice and the
regulator role. Approved codes of practice
must be developed with WorkSafe, with the participation of unions and workers,
be regularly reviewed and act as guidance without setting a
ceiling on reasonably practicable duties.
We're narrowing WorkSafe's oversight to only catastrophic risks,
risks enforcement gaps, and inconsistent sector
outcomes. We also have concerns about the problem with relying on
other enactments, so proposed Section 35 treats compliance with other
regulatory regimes
as equivalent to Health and Safety at Work Act duties.
It's unsafe. Many laws, wildlife, marine, education,
earthquake compliance, corrections regulations, are designed for other
purposes and do not protect worker safety.
This should not proceed.
So in terms of the economic and system consequences, so if these changes are
made and everyday hazards are deprioritized, ACC claims,
health system demand, and productivity losses, they will rise, shifting
costs on to the
state, onto workers, and onto the workers' families and
communities. We all want a country where we're all confident that our children and
our family members and our friends will come home safe from work.
The bill makes this less likely, and we do not support it.
In terms of our ask, what we're asking from the committee,
we're asked to recommend that the bill does not progress in its current form.
Please require amendments to retain universal health and safety duties
for all PCBUs. Remove the small PCBU carve-out
to keep all workers safe. Broaden the scope beyond the critical
risks.Tighten Section 35 and mandate WorkSafe
worker and union participation in the approved codes of
practice. And thank you, that's our presentation for this morning.
Thank you very much. We have three questions.
Hopefully, we can get through all of them. We have the first question from Carl.
In the industries and the work sites that the PSA covers,
is there any correlation between
level of risk
and size of enterprise, number of employees in a PCBU?
Sue.
Yeah, I think
there is some clear research, but really hard to come by,
that there are a number of
more risks in smaller places, and
because larger places, as corrections, for example, where
they
do have some very high risks-
Yeah
... but they have really robust health and safety systems.
So there's higher risk-
That includes workers-
... in smaller workplaces.
Because there is often less of an internal system in the background,
right?
Right. Yeah.
Corrections have got a multitude of health and safety governance committees, and
workers are involved right from the floor up.
Similarly, at the Department of Conservation, another place with quite high level
critical risks.
Yep.
People working under helicopters and in helicopters.
And yet this bill weakens the protections for those smaller workplaces.
Yes.
The most vulnerable.
Yep.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah. And so again, generally outside the public
service, the businesses that we work with that have the highest
risks-
Yep
... helicopters, small boats,
construction at height, abseiling for weed control,
the use of toxic sprays, these are all small businesses-
Mm
... that we use for those.
Thank you. If we can try and get to Carl Bates and then Ricardo,
and then Desmond.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks for your submission.
In your experience, in all of the involvement you've had in health and
safety,
one of the
aims of this bill is to reduce the compliance burden for business,
in the health and safety management of risk.
Where have your members or your own engagement,
any recent examples of recommending changes
to health and safety practice that have removed
unnecessary compliance burdens in your
workplaces, or is it always layering on
another layer of requirements, activity, compliance?
I think most of the workplaces where our members were,
it is the simple process of including the worker voice in any conversation that's
held around health and safety. It doesn't create lots of extra time or
complexity, and it works well, and conversations occur.
Even in a small, like if we look at Ministry for Women, for example, it's a small
place. They don't have a huge health and safety system.
They work alongside the government health and ...
by the Public Service Commission.
And, so it doesn't create lots of extra paperwork and lots of extra time because
they share that among one another.
So, does, is that answer to your question?
So my question is-
Yeah
... are there any examples of where you've gone, "That process actually isn't
needed. We're taking it away," that you can think of?
No, I don't think ... I think the issue here from our perspective is
where there's good employers and when they're working
together with their staff, with the unions, there's not seen to be
that much detail and complexity. It's embedded in business as usual.
They don't see it as an over and above and extra thing they have to do, and that's
with good employers, and that's the rationale there.
Mm.
And in our submission, we do note the surveys that we ran, both
with our wider health and safety advocates, but also with members
within, for example, WorkSafe. Where there's, again, the perception
that there's that complexity just isn't there where you've got a good functioning
health and safety workplace, and they're constantly looking to renew, refresh,
and update. So I don't necessarily think you'd call that additional layers of
bureaucracy. It's just they're constantly making sure that they're addressing the
need in the workplace.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you. That's all the time we have with you.
We appreciate your-
Thank you
... very detailed submissions and your participation in the process.
Lovely, Chair. Thank you, Committee.
All right. We now have the Tertiary Education Union joining us online.
And we have Megan Morris and Zoe Port.
Welcome.
Zoe, have we got Megan separately, or is she going to be in the same room with
you?
No. Kia ora, sorry. Megan, I've been told, is also in the Zoom.
She's in a different location. It might be that she's just changing. Here she is.
Oh, here we are. Wonderful.
Hi.
Okay. We have 10 minutes with you, that includes time for questions. Over to you.
I'm starting, eh, Zoe?
Tena koutou. Ko Megan Morris toku ingoa.
Ko Te Pō Matauranga me Te Pō Ahumahi tohu tuaharange
Aotearoa. I hold a national role as our union's
education industrial campaigns officer, and my experience includes about 15
years as a health and safety trainer for the CTU WorkSafe Rep program,
along with policy development and consultation.
I did a lot during COVID, the pandemic, and I've worked
across health, in aged care in my previous
life before I joined the tertiary sector, and I've been in the tertiary sector for
about the last 20 years.
More recently, though, we've been working increasingly in the,
or I have, in the psychosocial hazard and risk area around developing
courses, providing advice and technical support internally and
externally with other unions.
As our submission states, we work across the entirety of the tertiary sector.
We have over 11,000 members, and
we strongly oppose the proposed changes to this
billThe stated objectives of the proposed amendment
bill are to reduce unnecessary compliance costs, increase certainty
for business, and finally, to support continued reductions in the
incidents of workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
And it says a lot to
those of us who work predominantly with workers, that the priorities of
the proposed amendments seem to be that
compliance and businesses first, and worker health and safety is the
last objective.
One of the other stated areas of concerns around leading to the
amendments was around the confusion and over-compliance
from many PCBUs in the consultation period,
which to be clear from a worker perspective and the unions,
was overwhelmingly excluded worker voice through that process, all of the
meetings held around the country.
So we don't genuinely feel that this is a
good
representation of any necessary amendments to the
current legislation.
The focus on critical risk is really concerning for us.
It really exposes the gendered nature of the proposed changes, who
ignore women who make up largely about approximately 50% of the
workforce. And for all of those who work in female-dominated
occupational areas like health and education.
The biggest issues that we deal with are in the sort of hazards and
risk around in the psychosocial space.
So things like workload, continuous restructuring in our sector is a
massive problem, and that creates huge
issues around stress and fatigue, et
cetera. Also,
the
amendments largely ignore the musculoskeletal issues like
slips, trips, and falls.
And again,
harassment, bullying,
violence in the workplace.
The psychosocial area is often seen as invisible,
and the impacts of
being
affected by those sorts of things is really
wide-ranging and can often, will generally be
taken home to family, friends, et cetera.
If we look outside of our sector, for example, the focus on critical risk for
small businesses could potentially push the cost of PPE
onto workers. For example, workers in the care and support sector
who already been denied pay equity settlements, they travel massive
distances,
and they use their own vehicles with a completely inadequate petrol
reimbursement. But they're one of the most vulnerable groups in our workforce.
And if you are asking
them,
well, the bill could potentially ask them to provide their own PPE, for example.
So they already earn low wages, they cover their own petrol, they use their own
cars, and now they're having to provide their own PPE because the type of work that
they do would not fit the definition of critical risk that has been put into
this bill.
Or if you look into sort of trades and manufacturing and spaces like that,
most of the PPE available for workers is actually
designed by men for men. So it doesn't fit women very well, and if you
happen to be a petite woman, you've got serious problems trying to find
PPE that actually fits. And the point of the PPE
is that it is meant to provide appropriate
protection, whether it's overalls or respirators or helmets,
whatever it might be, steel cap boots, et cetera.
It's meant to provide you with that element of protection so that when you do your
job, you can do it safely.
That would not occur.
The amendment bill will, in effect, create a two-tier system of
managing health and safety, which in our opinion, will only increase
confusion and uncertainty for PCBUs, not reduce
it. It will also
increase exposure for workers to hazards and risks,
especially in the small business space,
and do nothing to reduce the incidents of workplace fatalities,
serious injuries, or illnesses. So,
if we think about the point of the exercise with health and
safety legislation is about protecting workers and ensuring that
they can do their job safely and well, and go home to
their families safe and well, and not have ongoing
impacts from the job that they do affecting their everyday lives.
I don't believe that the changes in this legislation will actually
address that in any way, shape, or form.
I would also note that worker
voice is absolutely critical to ensuring good compliance with
legislation. So in our sector,
most of the employers are relatively large, and they do have reasonable
systems.
But the issues of
working with workers and their health and safety reps
across the
sector
is good in some places and not so good in others.
But we work really hard with those employers to ensure that they do have
robust systems in place that can protect our workers.
But it's not always perfect.
And we've got
in the psychosocial space, in particular, those are really hard to
deal with. And
it is critical for us that we ensure that there are
systems in place that can make that an easier process to manage.
And again, don't believe that the changes in this bill will do that.
I might just stop there and allow Zoe
Thanks so much, Megan. On that, I would like to just add, so Kia Ora,
Dr Zoe Port, lecturer in management at Massey University and TU
member. And my research expertise is particularly in the area of managing
psychosocial risks and creating healthy work. I teach and research in this area.
And I guess one thing I wanted to say is our sector, the tertiary
sector, it is meant to be grounded in evidence.
We must be evidence-informed in our teaching.
We don't just
convey whatever ideas we personally like to.
We base it on the research and the evidence, and I'd posit that many of the claims
upon which the most egregious changes in this bill are proposed, that
Megan has mentioned,
they are simply not grounded in evidence, and in many cases they
contradict evidence and expert opinion, including experts from the
past Pike River Royal Commission.
And just one point I want to drive home around psychosocial risk and hazards
as well, and why it is problematic that it essentially gets overlooked by the
narrow definition of critical risk, is that psychosocial hazards are
unique. They arise from the way work is designed, organized, and managed, things
like excessive workload, like Megan has said.
And the harm from them doesn't just stop when the worker
leaves the office at the end of the day or leaves the workplace.
Unlike a physical hazard that can only get me at work, psychosocial harm,
it can continue to manifest in the worker's mind, and the impact can continue
to weigh on them.
And it manifests not only in terms of mental health outcomes, but also physical.
For example, there's a huge body of international evidence on, say, psychosocial
hazards and cardiovascular disease.
So just to drive that home, we cannot be overlooking psychosocial hazards
as this definition does, because they cause just as much harm as more
visible hazards. I think being mindful of time, I will leave that there.
Thank you. We have run out of time with you, but do appreciate your participation
in the process. Thank you for being with us today.
Kia ora.
We'll move on now to Retail New Zealand,
who are in the room,
and we'll come back to Bathurst Resources if they
join us.
Thank you very much. We've got Carolyn Young, Denise Garland, and Yevgenia.
Yevgenia.
Thank you. Chair.
Time is yours. Sorry, 10 minutes, includes time for questions.
Sorry. Thank you-
That's okay
... very much for the time. Really appreciate the opportunity to be here.
My name's Carolyn, as you mentioned, my colleague, Denise,
and Yev.
So look,
we know that you've read the submission, so we're not going to go through that.
Just want to highlight a couple of things, then we open for questions.
Look, in principle, we support the bill.
We think there's a couple of areas that need further clarification.
So our concerns are that this bill would
potentially give reason to believe that small retailers may not be
liable to manage their risks adequately.
So, prioritizing critical risks means we don't want them to ignore
hazards, which is not the intention of the bill.
We feel that critical risks need to have some greater clarity.
And we don't want a small retailer or a small
business, of which in New Zealand there are many, that's what we're made up of,
that's our sort of fabric, we don't want them to have the mentality that it doesn't
apply to them. So,
we think that you have to manage small risks because a lot of small risks can end
up being a larger risk. So we need to be aware that language and
education is going to be really important to make sure that
business owners really understand where the threshold sits and
where it crosses over for their business and
their environment.
One of the things, to give you an example, when
some of the initial
wording of the bill came out and there was some announcements around it
was going to make it easier for SMEs to navigate health and safety, we had a
member call us, and I spoke to them directly myself, and they sort of said,
"Okay, well, we won't need to worry about all of these things.
Can I now not have to pay for... We've got a health
and safety consultant that we use that manages all of our things.
We've got these big manuals. We won't have to worry about that." And I'm like,
"Taiho,
little bit premature. We're not there yet.
That was months and months ago, and they were ready to change then." So
just remembering that headlines that come out aren't the detail, and SMEs
don't have, we've been talking quite extensively in the office, that SMEs don't
have the time or skills to navigate and find their ways
through
legislation
and the detail. And what we've seen is that, for example, the
definition of critical risks are included in Schedule 1
through ACC,
talking about the death and loss of limb, et cetera.
But the detail of what could cause that
critical risk is not really present.
So you really have to evaluate what the various sources are to
understand how to define a risk. So if it's about an object falling from
a height, it's included in Schedule 1A, and then you have to
go to the regs,
which says it has to be managed in accordance with regs 5 to 8.
And then you have to understand those regs.
And for a small business to be able to navigate all of that, I think is quite
complicated. And I know the intention of the bill is to make it easier for small
businesses, and we agree with that intention, but I'm not sure
that it is as straightforward, having to go through lots of different
legislation. Yev manages our advice line, and we have members that
call us asking us questions, and there's no doubt we're going to get more
inquiries from members around how they would navigate this, because
they would look at it quite simplistically
around one aspect and really thinking about how
would a retailer be impacted in these ways.
So we think greater clarification's needed, also on
notification or events.
You don't
want to have to reference lots of different pieces in order to
find your way through. And then the other piece was really about, we've had some
mixed feedback about the responsibility of employeesAnd making sure that
an employee has... It's understood that we all have
responsibilities as employees to comply to health and
safety, and that it's not only on the employer.
So an employee has to still follow instructions and manuals
and
the details that are set out for your business.
And I think we're not sure that there's enough emphasis put in that place there so
that it's a joint responsibility for us all to keep safe.
And then the other thing, I guess, really, is that headcount
alone doesn't define risk. So a business with less than 20 people
doesn't make it any less risky-
Mm
... than a business with 100 or 200 or 500
people, right?
There are low-risk businesses and there are high-risk businesses.
Mm.
And I think that nuance is an interesting aspect.
Mm. Yeah.
Thank you.
Any more questions?
Yeah, wonderful. And we have heard that a lot, so appreciate it.
So far, I've got a question from Carl Bates first, and then Phil Twyford.
So we'll start with Carl.
Thanks very much. Thanks, Carolyn, for that overview.
The point you make about the small business person that rang you up,
doesn't that reflect the challenge that there is with many businesses
seeing health and safety as, "I've got the manual, I'm ticking the box."
And therefore, unless culture changes, nothing changes.
So what can we do to make the compliance burden-
Mm. Mm
... smaller, remove unnecessary cost, but at the
same time, change that cultural engagement?
Really great question, and I think that nails it on the head right, because the
sense is, is that it's so burdensome now that if you don't
have a really manual like this that makes sure you dot
every I and cross every T, that you're going to get smashed if something
goes wrong. Whereas actually, what we want to do is to be able to
assess the workplace. What are the risks for
this workplace? How do we make sure that we've got a fit for
purpose-
Mm
... requirements that can be followed both by the employer
and the employees to ensure that everyone's safe.
We want an environment in New Zealand
where people go to work safe and they come home safe.
That's what every business owner wants.
They don't want risks for their employees.
They don't want them to be suffering in any sort of way, but we need to be
able to come together, and I think there's a piece around education, and there's a
piece around understanding what is practical and how that will be
applied. I think that's the intention of where we're trying to head here, and I'm
not sure if we're there yet or not, but I think what we've currently got
is really about paperwork. It's not about-
Mm
... I don't think that everyone on both sides of the fence
are buying in. Whereas actually, what the bill is trying to do is move us into a
place where it's more fit for purpose.
Mm.
Not sure if we've quite got there. That would be our feedback.
Incredibly helpful.
Thanks, Carl.
A question from Phil Twyford.
How do you feel about the fact that in your industry, if this bill
is passed, as it's currently drafted, that
workers who are in an enterprise with 19 workers
will have weaker protections of their health and safety at work
than a business next door that's got 21 staff?
Yeah, so-
How do you feel about that as an industry? Does that feel okay to you?
I guess that's what we were saying, headcount alone doesn't determine
what risk looks like. So if you think about a retail store, if we think about a
store that's maybe got 20 stores throughout New Zealand, they'd be well over the
20.
Oh, okay.
In their shop, there's no more risk in their shop-
No
... than there is in the shop next door.
Yep.
And
there might be different risks in a warehouse, and we feel that you
could be able to define what a warehouse or distribution center would look like in
terms of risk. But on the shop floor, if you're an apparel retailer,
very low risk.
Supplementary to that.
Phil, then Carl.
The bill basically privileges so-called
critical risks and deprioritizes so-called
non-critical risks, and on the face of it, I would think that in
your sector, the health and safety hazards that workers
experience are primarily non-critical risks in terms of the
definitions in this bill. So your industry,
as a whole, is going to experience reduced protections
for workers' health and safety. How do you feel about that?
I think it's mixed because there are
quite a few businesses that will have higher level
risk because of the types of products that they sell.
And I think what I was trying to allude to is
kind of that space that we don't want businesses to have
the... What were the words that I used?
That are smeak and think that anything goes mentality, that it's all
okay now. They still have to understand what
their compliance requirements are, and that they need to make sure that it's a
safe environment, as does any employer, but it's
actually getting it fit for purpose.
So is
having a really big manual that people are ticking boxes, is
that effective? Probably not.
Mm.
Are we saying that a smaller business has less risk than a big business?
I don't think that's the case.
Mm.
May I just add-
Sure
... something? On the concept of
less risk or less responsibility, more responsibility, we did have
feedback from a few of our members acknowledging
overlapping duties. There is currently responsibility
when two PCBs or more are
working in the same space. For example, retailers in shopping centers or
malls-
Mm
... contractors that come in to do work.
There's this overlapping duties where both
parties
share their responsibilities for managing those health and safety risks.
If you have a small retailer that's, let's say, the small
risk
category, that they only prioritize the critical risks, but there's
another employer at the same site who has a greater number
of staff, or a contractor comes in from a major service provider,
technically because of the number of employees they have-That
contractor has greater health and safety responsibilities
in that small store than the retailer does.
So we have heard feedback that actually that's quite confusing.
Mm.
It's not balanced.
It's not fair. And yes, there are less
protections for workers, which retailers don't want.
They want to protect their workers.
They want to know how to do it effectively, and that's where they're struggling.
A final question from Carl. Succinct, please.
Thanks. Kia, going back to your point about the multi-site versus the
individual, having been on the board of multi-site and in family
businesses of our own that are single site-
Succinct, Carl
... isn't there a fundamental difference that in the multi-site you've got a
much broader risk and a much bigger difference between the
site and management and governance, whereas in the single site, you've
got people actually who are owning that business on site,
watching those things all of the time?
Yeah, look, I think you can see that certainly can be true in some
situations, and it can also be depending on the type of business
you're running as to what risks there are.
But we know,
for example, in large national businesses, they will have
really thorough and really great health and safety
manuals. It is the responsibility at each site for them to be
implemented well, right? And so you're reliant on
whether it's store managers or regional managers to enforce those things and for
employees to take those responsibilities.
So there can be some different challenges in making sure that those standards are
adhered to.
Mm-hmm.
But in a small business too, as you would know, sometimes standards are
adhered to when the owner is there, but not when they're not.
So those things can happen in both spaces,
but it doesn't mean to say that one will have more risk than the other.
Mm. Thank you. We are well and truly out of time. Appreciate your participation.
Thank you.
Clearly a very helpful submission. Thank you.
We've got Bathurst Resources Limited online now, so
we'll move back to them.
Richard Tacon and Fiona Bartier,
if you could turn on your cameras and audio.
Turning them on.
Good.
Wonderful.
Good up?
Hello. We have 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions.
Over to you.
Thank you very much, Chair, members of the committee. My name's Fiona Bartier.
I'm the General Manager of Health, Safety, Environment Community for Bathurst
Resources.
And I'm Richard Tacon, CEO of Bathurst Resources.
Thanks very much for giving us this opportunity.
Bathurst is New Zealand's leading coal mining company.
We operate four opencast coal mines in the West Coast, Southland,
and Waikato, and we directly employ 675 people.
Managing hazards capable of causing catastrophic harm is
central to how we operate.
We support the core intent of this bill.
Refocusing attention and resources on preventing serious workplace harm is the
right policy direction. For today's oral submission, though, we'll just focus
on the definition of critical risk and the opportunities that we see to strengthen
it. Getting this definition is fundamental.
We've been running a critical risk management program for many years, and our
experience as a high-risk industry is that
if everything becomes critical as per the definition,
nothing stays critical.
The definition of the bill as drafted risk creating onerous and confusing
situations for PCBUs, especially small PCBUs that don't
have the capacity to manage overly
complex classification systems.
The extractive sector already works under catastrophic hazards
through our principal hazard framework
and is regulated through WorkSafe's Specialist Extractives Inspectorate.
Aligning the general act with this established principal hazard, principal control
approach would improve coherence across the health and safety system and
better support catastrophic harm prevention in high-risk industries,
and as an outcome, our critical risks.
Following
review of the definition of critical risk, we've identified a few matters.
Anchoring the definition into notifiable events is conceptually flawed.
This framework was designed to support what has already happened.
It's not to classify which hazards have
catastrophic mechanism
as a risk identification.
There's misalignment with the purpose of notifiable events.
Many notifiable injuries or illnesses,
such as lacerations or skin conditions, are not catastrophic.
Conversely, some cannot trigger notification until there is imminent failure.
This misalignment of risks, classifying too many lower-level
hazards as critical,
may lead to a loss of focus on the high-consequence risks.
There's a dilution of focus potential where routine operational
hazards that may give rise to a notifiable event, yet are well managed, will become
critical risks. This spreads governance attention and resources too
thinly
and diverts away from the hazards that generally threaten
lives. The definition doesn't provide a clear distinction
between critical risks and
general operational risks,
as
was just discussed, being used as the phrase for non-critical risks.
This creates inconsistency across industries and reduces the ability to prioritize
hazards that can result in fatalities or permanently disabling injuries.
Creating an administrative burden rather than a risk reduction
is a-Another matter. An overly
broad and prescriptive definition encourages organisations to build systems to
manage classification rather than managing catastrophic risk itself.
This is especially problematic for small PCBUs, who could
face disproportionate compliance demands without any improvement to safety
outcomes. Psychosocial hazards may also be missed.
At the moment, it's focusing on physical incidents and notifiable
events that may not adequately capture the longer-term health risks,
such as stress, fatigue, or bullying that could lead to serious harm.
Prescriptive definitions do not deliver in practice.
A fixed definition with a prescribed schedule cannot account for variations across
and within industries or risks over time.
High-risk sectors such as construction, forestry, agriculture may find that the
list in its current form does not reflect their highest risk hazards,
limiting their ability to manage them effectively.
The
current definition doesn't provide for support for meaningful engagement with
workers involved in or affected by hazards, and these
people
are best placed to identify real critical
risks and to recognize when controls are degrading.
In our submission, we put up nine refinements, but I just wanted to
focus on those that reflect critical risk.
We request the redefinition of critical risk to
focus squarely on catastrophic outcomes.
We propose a critical risk is a risk arising from a hazard with the potential
to cause fatal or permanently disabling harm, whether through a single
event or a repeated exposure.
Recognize principal hazards within the Health and Safety at Work Act, particularly
for high-hazard sectors as it occurs now in mines
and quarries, and require PCBUs to develop principal hazard
management plans where principal hazards and critical risks are identified as
being present.
Reframe Schedule 1A as illustrative rather than prescriptive.
Require critical control verifications as a core component of the framework,
ensuring that the controls that prevent catastrophic outcomes remain
effectively and are systematically monitored.
Mandate meaningful worker engagement in identifying critical risks
and in developing and monitoring controls.
Ensure that the framework captures psychosocial hazards.
So, to conclude, catastrophic events rarely occur because hazards
are unknown. They occur when organizations never identify or lose
clarity about which hazards have catastrophic potential, when
critical controls degrade without detection, and when workers are not
meaningfully involved in risk management operational
practice. A framework that clearly requires each workplace to
identify its own catastrophic hazards and to verify the
effectiveness of the critical controls preventing them will best
support leaders to resource and focus on the risks that matters most.
Thank you.
Thank you. We have time for one question. Riccardo Menini-Match.
Thank you so much.
Stanwell Pike noted the risks of psychosocial harms in the
workplace,
and in mines as well. Paragraph 44, you noted your concerns around
psychosocial hazards being absent, and you put in some
additional recommendations to include these.
Would you mind outlining the types of psychosocial harms that
could be present in the workplaces that you represent?
And why they would pose-
Yes. There is a
good
WorkSafe report at the moment, like a guideline around the
psychosocial harm within the workplace.
It's a mixture of
health and safety matters, such as fatigue,
or bullying,
in the psychosocial space,
through to what roster you're on,
what your job demands, are you clear about what your role is.
So there's some really good outline in that
avenue,
or in that particular lot of guidance.
It isn't only around bullying and fatigue that will create
psychosocial hazards.
And I guess, we operate 24/7
operations.
Oh, I'm not sure if you've frozen or whether that was a very abrupt finish to your-
I think they have frozen.
So, we take into account many of those aspects around
job...
Okay, great.
Thank you.
Hello?
Sorry.
Patchy in the end, but we understood.
Thank you very much for your contribution to this process.
Okay.
We really appreciate it.
Okay. Thanks very much.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to the New Zealand Institute of Directors.
We have Guy Beatson and Herman
Vizigeer. Wonderful. It's always a risk when
I say that.
Welcome, you got 10 minutes, and that includes time for questions.
Right. Tena koutou, Chair and committee members.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak to the Institute of Directors' submission on
Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill.
Also to our chartered fellow of the institute and the- ...
the committee this morning. I'm Guy Beatson.
I'm General Manager of the Governance Leadership Centre at the Institute of
Directors, and with me is Herman Vizigeer, who will be succeeding me in this role
next Monday.
Oh, congratulations.
So you're getting two general managers of the Governance
Leadership Centre for the price of one.
The IoD's focus is on how the bill can best support
effective health and safety governance and better outcomes in workplaces.
And given all the literature we've all seen on that, that's well and truly
necessary. The submission also reflects the IoD's unique focus on
governance, as opposed to some of the other people who will come before you in the
next several days.Herman's going to briefly cover the
provisions we support in the bill, and I'll quickly outline the targeted
changes we're recommending in our submission. Herman.
Brilliant. Well, kia ora koutou. So obviously the institute
represents over 10,000 members,
covering leading directors across listed private, public, and not-for-profit
sectors. And we're committed to lifting good governance practice for all
of Aotearoa. So we support the parts of the bill that improve the
clarity and enable better guidance for duty holders and boards.
Going through them quickly, first, we support the bill's provision on approved
codes of practice, which would enable the development of a health and safety
governance approved code of practice, building on established good
practice guidance. Second, we support the role clarification
where people hold multiple roles, particularly relevant in smaller organizations
where governance and management is often tightly intertwined.
Although obviously less relevant in the context of independent boards, which
is something Guy will talk about shortly.
And third, we support the move to clearer, exhaustive officer duties rather than
an open-ended list, because this increases certainty for
officers, particularly board members in a range of organizations that
our members govern.
So overall, these elements align with the objective of strengthening practical, and
I think that's the key word, practical understanding of duties and supporting
better governance practice.
Where we do think the bill probably needs a little bit of strengthening is around
how it deals with governance arrangements in organizations that
have that formal board structure with a separated management and governance
layer,
and the clarity of collective accountability.
And Guy will touch on these points quickly.
Thanks, Herman. The
IoD's key point in our submission is that while the bill
improves clarity for smaller entities in multiple role situations,
it doesn't sufficiently address those more formal governance issues
that does clearly separate that from executive management.
One of the key things we've done across a range of legislation is trying to get to
a point where the legislation itself encourages good practice governance,
and separates that out from the duties and roles that executive management have.
In terms of specifics, we're recommending a number of targeted amendments
to the bill, which reflected our submission in the minister's process
from October 2024.
Firstly, we'd like to see more clarity about officer duties for larger
organizations with separate independent governance where there's a board.
So we've made a suggestion of amending the bill further,
and the act further, to introduce a provision that would apply to organizations
with more than 20 employees,
where that governance is distinct from management.
We're also pretty keen to make sure that there's a collective as well as individual
responsibility,
to encourage the fact that the magic of a board is actually bringing together a
diverse group of people to govern an organization as a whole, as
opposed to individual duties.
We'd like to define
that collective board accountability, and those responsibilities so
that that plays out.
We're also worried about, and continue to be worried in this instance, that the
punitive penalties in the law as it currently stands has perverse impacts.
And we've seen that play out in a range of other legislation, that includes the
changes being made to the CCCFA in the finance sector, but also the changes
being made to liability settings for climate-related disclosures.
In both of those cases, they've respectively resulted in
perverse lending outcomes, so more conservative lending according to a regulatory
impact statement done by MB. And secondly, resulted in less
disclosure of climate-related disclosures where those penalties have been in place.
So we'd like to see that change. We don't have a particular policy position
on how that might happen, but it's definitely one of those things where our
director members report to us that compliance is increased because of the nature of
those punitive penalties. And we think you can still maintain the
duties, but doing something about the penalty side of it, that
would be useful. Lastly, and we're not unique in this, we've
advocated for a more systemic approach to health and safety across regulators,
policymakers, and others involved in that sector, including ACC.
That would mean that when matters like the ones you're considering through the bill
are addressed, then the whole system comes to the party rather than just one piece
of it, whether that's the regulators or the policymakers.
Our suggestion in our submission is to do that in
part by requiring a health and safety at work strategy to be
produced at least every three years.
One last thing we wanted to highlight, was a level of uncertainty we think
is created by Clause 12. The intent of having
the
legislation that relates to other parts of health and safety being brought into
this net makes sense. The issue in terms of the way that's framed in Clause
12, it looks like a really quick fix to a very complex problem.
And so there's two pieces that we wanted to draw to your attention.
One was the uncertainty that potentially creates.
Secondly, that it's possible that that other legislation has a lower standard of
health and safety that goes with it than the Health and Safety at Work Act
itself and the other provisions that go with it.
In closing, we support the bill where it improves clarity and guidance.
We encourage amendments that better reflect how boards and executives work in
practice, particularly around collective accountability and government's management
delineation. Thank you for taking our submission, both
written and orally today. We're happy to stop there and leave the remaining time
for the committee for questions on our submission.
Thank you, and as you could expect, we have a question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair, and thanks for your submission today.
We've had several submissions suggesting that nothing should be changed in
terms of the current legislation around health and safety.
You make the statement in the submission that a good faith
judgment instead of fear-based compliance, and you go on to make some
statements around essentially compliance being
driven
by paperwork as opposed to positive outcome.
Do you think that we can change the settings
And achieve better health and safety outcomes for New
Zealand workers without going backwards?
Yes. It's interesting when you think about, we wrote a guide
for health and safety governance in 2016, so after the act was passed in
2015.
That
guide basically followed the act, and what we
observed at the time was that there was a range of advice being given to directors
and boards from legal firms,
that was essentially scaring them witless.
That it said, actually, you're going to lose your house.
There's a whole bunch of other stuff like that.
We've worked with our partners, including Business Leaders' Health and Safety
Forum, the General Managers Safety Forum more recently, and a new guide we
published in 2024, which turns that on its head.
That says, "We want you to think about good practice governance,
and if you follow those things through in the health and safety realm, you'll get
better outcomes, you'll get better attention from boards,
and much less of that compliance."
In our
fourth pillar of the four pillars of best practice governance, we say we want
people to focus on effective compliance, but we want to have them do
that in the spirit of the law, not the letter of it.
At the moment, those penalties, particularly in the way they're framed, are having
the obvious effect. That doesn't mean there shouldn't be accountability.
What it means, though, is the
level of fear that's created as a result of those penalties is extremely high,
and some other way of attending to that would be useful.
We think
the approved codes of practice, if we could actually get some version of that
health and safety good practice governance guide translated into
a code of practice,
and with that safe harbor might have similar effects.
Thank you.
Great.
Thank you very much. Appreciate your time.
Sure.
It's been a wonderful submission,
both written and orally.
And we will move on now to our next submitter.
Right. Thanks so much.
Thank you.
We now have the Health and Safety Association of New Zealand.
Joe Bain, Joel Major, and Mike O'Brien.
Wonderful. Welcome back.
All right. Ten minutes, as you have heard, includes time for questions.
Over to you.
Lovely. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I'm Mike O'Brien, independent chair of HAZANZ.
To my right, Joe Bain is actually taking on the new interim role of executive
director for HAZANZ, and is also the vice chair
of the New Zealand Society of Engineering Safety.
And to my left is Joel Major, who is HAZANZ's governance group member,
and he's also chair of the Institute of New Zealand Organizational Psychology.
The Society, I should say.
No, the Institute.
So just to be clear, HAZANZ represents 11 member
associations. Sorry, 12 member associations across 11 health and
safety disciplines. And it represents about 5,500 health and
safety practitioners and professionals across New Zealand,
supporting large and small business, both within companies
and also as contractors and
consultants as well.
HAZANZ set up a register, and we now have about
575 health and safety advisors and professionals on that
register to help business understand what their critical risks
are and what controls to put in place, and how they might support
the effectiveness of those controls.
And over the last five years, HAZANZ has put over 160 scholarships in the market
to really lift up the capability of New Zealand in regards
to the advisor community, to make sure that we have people
who are appropriately qualified and competent to give good advice and sound advice
to business.
We've coordinated our submission response
across our member associations, to make sure that we've got clarity
around what we're considering. And
we support any effort to improve health and safety,
but we recommend amendments, which we've outlined in our submission in detail,
and we won't go through that today in detail.
And it's really about reducing and removing the unintended consequences,
and confusion
that this bill is
likely to cause.
I'll just quickly briefly talk about one of the components, and then I'll hand
over to Joe and then to Joel, and then we'll open for questions.
One of the key issues, we think, is the impacts of a two-tiered
risk-based system. It reduces the protection for workers,
fundamentally, and particularly of small companies.
And
the second thing is it really complicates supply chains.
And so if you think about a small business
moving on and working with a large organization,
and a large organization working on a small business site and
go across any industry, that's quite significant in regards to the complexity that
that might cause, and the confusion that that might cause.
The other thing is, it's out of sync completely.
This two-tiered risk-based strategy is
out of sync in regards to other high-performing jurisdictions.
So specifically we think of the Australia
jurisdiction, UK, and also the ILO.
So we would implore you to have a look across those other jurisdictions
and just try and understand why are we suddenly thinking that we might have some
better ideas to go completely out of sync with the other markets that are
performing really highly by comparison to ourselves, and that's well documented
through evidence.
I'll just hand to Joe.
Thank you, Mike.
Thank you, everybody. I'm going to make a few comments specifically about
the approved code of practice provisions in the draft bill,
which can basically be boiled down to opening up an avenue
for industry-developed
guidance to be created and then approved by the minister with the regulator's
approval,
and introducing effectively a safe harbor provision
where an approved code of practice governs a particular risk, where
any PCB would be deemed to have satisfied its duties if it complies with
that ACOP.
We're not terribly bothered by the
possibility of industry-developed codes of practice being possible, because it's
already practically possible.
If an industry group approaches the regulator and wants to develop a code of
practice, that can happen.
Where we have concerns is around the safe harbor provision.
Because historically, New Zealand's track record on
regulations and guidance and standards development and maintaining
currency of those things has been very, very poor.
So if we start creating approved codes of practice with a safe
harbor provision, then what we run the risk of is
having lines in the sand, effectively regulations baked into
those approved codes of practice that become increasingly obsolete
as ways of doing work and technological systems and so forth develop
over time. Unless there's some mechanism for updating them, for
reviewing them, for some sort of sunset provision or anything to make
sure that the guidance is actually being updated,
then what we're going to wind up with is actually more complexity for
businesses rather than less, especially as best practice
develops.
Joel.
Thank you for having me. My comments this afternoon will focus much more on the
importance of retaining a strong prevention focus in the health and safety system,
including worker voice, occupational health, and long-term harm caused by
exposure over time.
Our concern really is that the bill's critical risk framing, as it stands, may
unintentionally narrow attention toward acute and visible hazards, and
away from harms that arise cumulatively through work over time.
And that matters because, the greatest burden of work-related harm is often not
acute injury, but longer-term exposure.
And I know you've heard a lot about psychosocial risk and harm so far, so I won't
jump into that.
But this does highlight to us that occupational health needs to remain a
priority. These are not secondary issues.
They make up a major share of the health-related burden of harm.
So the core problem for us is that the bill appears to focus the system more
heavily on critical risks, with a strong pull towards acute injury and
immediately visible harm. Combined with the small PCBU carve-out
that was mentioned by Mike, there's a real risk that broader occupational
health harms become less salient in practice.
And we feel the legislation should preserve prevention, worker voice, and a clear
focus on occupational health, including cumulative harms.
If those harms are given less prominence in the framework, the harm does not
disappear, the costs are simply shifted elsewhere.
Wonderful. Excellent work. Any questions?
Questions. Wonderful. We have the first question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair.
You make a number of comments regarding the overlapping of the legislation,
in terms of point seven, deemed compliance,
4.7.
I want to tease out your concern a little bit more
around where a piece of legislation's been worked through,
concluded, specific health and safety requirements for whatever that industry
or issue is,
that you don't think that that would be strong enough to allow for deemed
compliance.
I'll probably just take a first comment on that.
So I might hand over to my colleagues.
The key issue for me is that a number of those other pieces of
legislation are just sometimes out of date or not so much out of
date. From a health and safety perspective, they're quite aged, and some of
those would go back to multiple tens of years.
And so what we're effectively be doing is degrading our health and safety
laws in that particular sector in relation to that particular
legislation to something that might have been put in place in the 1950s or
'60s.
The Railways Act comes to mind. There's quite a
number of different pieces of legislation and we'd need to go through and say,
okay, for every one of those pieces of legislation, do they
degrade or improve the health and
safety to our workforce?
So if they were either updated or a
similar approach to the codes of practice where these ones aren't included,
but going forward, that could be the rule, would that satisfy your concern?
Yes, it would, but my concern is
the effort that that takes and the time that takes and this law, as my
understanding, will come into effect as soon as it's passed.
And so I think we'd have a complete disconnect for a period of
time.
Thank you. Dan Rosewarne, next question.
Thanks, Chair. So Joel, you just mentioned you had a focus
around prevention.
What's particularly troubling with the bill in my view is that there's no
consequences for businesses who do not prioritize critical
risks, and I was just wondering how you think the bill could be improved
so those critical risks are prioritized by businesses.
Well, Dan, I think that's a good question, and I think that there are a few
parts to this.
In the first instance, I agree around the lack of prioritization.
There could be some amendments made around the importance of prioritization, but we
also have to address the core problem around the PCBU carve-out because even
if we address the prioritization element of that, we still have a large
majority of enterprises in New Zealand who will not be required to manage the more
general elements. One thing that could also be changed is the
inclusion of things like psychosocial risk into a critical risk
framing if that was the direction that this took.
Thanks, Joel.
Thank you. Thank you very much. A very comprehensive submission.
Thank you for being part of the process and joining us today.
And Mike, you're staying at the table, so
your colleagues
move back into the ranks and we'll hand over to you.
You have five minutes-
No problem
... as an individual. And then that also includes time for questions.
Excellent. Thank you for that. I'm changing my hats now. Okay.
So I'm just taking my HAZANZ chair hat off.
And just to give you a little bit of context, so over the
last five to eight years, I've been a chair on HAZANZ for eight years, but I've
been really working on the health and safety ecosystem and the system itself for
the last five years.
And that in particular, I've been a steering group member of the Business Leaders
Forum.
I'm also a steering committee member on the GM Safety Forum,
a trustee of ShopCare, and also project lead for
director for a initiative called Future Safe Aotearoa.
And Future Safe Aotearoa has been really thinking about the wider system and
how we activate the system.
So I've been thinking about four key pillars
in regards to how we improve the health and safety system, back to some of
your questions. Leadership at an organization and system level,
capability and making sure we've got the right people with the right capability to
give organizations good advice on understanding risks and putting the
controls in place,
technology to be able to really substantially move the dial
on actually reducing workplace harm, and then government regulation
about getting really clarity around what businesses need to
follow per industry and per sector,
insurance, in regards to the right incentives and disincentives and
procurement. And so when I look at that and think about those key levers,
I look at this bill, and I think it's pulling one very small
lever, and it's pulling one piece, and it may cause
some confusion in that. But fundamentally, I'm looking at it and thinking,
I've got a problem in that we're not putting the system
investment around the resources needed to actually support this bill.
So one of the things that we're considering is that we'll enact this bill, and
we will put it into law straight away.
When in actual fact, when I look at when we set up the
legislation, HSWA legislation, we had
intended to spend some time putting regulation in place.
And you look at things like working from heights, plants and structures,
hazardous substances. We haven't done any of that groundwork around the
regulations. So now we're trying to shoehorn in
ACOPS and guidelines to try and fill that gap.
And it's a real problem because it'll create a problem at law in
regards to trying to get organizations to understand.
It'll create quite a lot of confusion.
WorkSafe are doing the best they can to act quickly and
fast to try and get some good regulations in part in place.
But the challenge is, is that the system is not geared up and does not have
the resource or the funding to actually go and respond to and
engage on solving those problems and providing that
clarity.
So we're going to
have a problem in putting a law in place and we'll be operating in
regulations that are not there and guidance and ACOPS
that are not appropriately resourced and funded at a system
level. So my submission has focused on a couple of things.
Before I go to where I focus the submission on, I just
wanted to make one other highlight, and that is the unintended
consequences, and I just need to give you a really specific example.
The unintended consequences of
taking the entire market's focus, in particular with
SMEs, off musculoskeletal long-term
harm and psychosocial, could have an unintended consequence
of significant cost on ACC.
Mm.
I'd just like you to look at ACC over the last five years.
They made a decision to remove case management.
And it was a great decision at the time because they wanted to think about
how they would get efficiency by putting a call center in place.
Mm.
The unintended consequence five years later cost ACC hundreds of
millions of dollars-
Yeah
... and has a detrimental impact on the system.
So be very careful as you think this law through, that you're not
unintentionally creating some unintended consequences
as you walk through. The last thing I'd say is, on my submission,
I've put an alternative solution in place
through a commissioning agency to fund the system to ensure that we
can respond and put all of those pieces of the
system that need to be put in place.
And so I would strongly recommend you read that submission and think
about what ideas can we put on the
table. But these are ideas based on my last five years' experience
on the working on the system, by the system, for the system, on thinking about
how we improve health and safety in New Zealand. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mike. Challenging trying to fit that into five minutes, but we
really appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Move on now to Simpson Grierson
we have in the room.
John Rooney and Mike Mercer.
We have 10 minutes with you, includes time for questions, although you guys are all
very expert at this, and consider your submission as read.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members of the select committee.
My name's John Rooney. This is my colleague, Mike Mercer.
We are experienced health and safety lawyers.
We regularly advise large organizations in high-risk
industries,
on matters such as managing risk and responding to serious
incident management, and also providing advice around
governance and leadership. And we thank you for the opportunity to provide these
oral submissions.
Simpson Grierson supports the core objectives of the bill,
particularly around the impact of the bill in improving
certainty for duty holders, reducing unnecessary
compliance burden, and refocusing the system on preventing
serious harm.
We wish to comment on three discrete areas which were covered in
our written submissions, and these are the definition and
practical understanding of critical risk,
the differentiated regime for small PCBUs-
Mm
... and thirdly, the treatment of approved codes of practice as safe
harbors.
Mike will briefly address the first two areas, and then I
will submit around the issue of ACOPS.
Kia ora koutou katoa. Thank you, Madam Chair and members of select committee.
We support the introduction of the statutory definition of critical risk and the
elevated importance of critical risk we have under the proposed
bill, particularly for small PCBUs.
That being said, we are concerned that it is not clearly prescribed how those
risks are to be managed by small PCBUs.
Our view is that there is an opportunity to utilize the particular
risk regime which already exists in the Health and Safety at Work
Regulations.
This would provide a much clearer understanding and
standard of explicitly requiring that critical risks be managed by small
PCBUs in accordance with the hierarchy of controls in the
regulations.
What this requires, so far as reasonably practicable, is that the hierarchy of
controls being engineering, substitution,
isolation controls are applied when minimizing the risk
of harm arising from these particular risks in these other regulations.
Importantly, the regulations provide that the PCBU can only
resort to or use remaining, controls such
as signage, administration, personal protection equipment,
only for that residual risk after those higher controls are applied.
Extending this requirement to those hazards that are being proposed under
Section 22A, subsection 1B, which
is the risks that are likely or the likely hazards, would provide
consistency and clear guidance for the small PCBUs.
And this would simply be aligning those with those hazards that are already
set out in Schedule 1A of the bill.
This could either be achieved by inserting the hierarchy of
controls from the general regulations into the Act or
by making a specific reference that states that small PCBUs
are required to apply the hierarchy of controls in respect of those critical
risks that they identify in their business.
In our recommendation, this does not create any new obligation.
This is simply aligning the treatment of these critical risks to small PCBUs
in the way that businesses, organizations, and regulators already
understand and apply the hierarchy of controls in the decision-making
process for particular risk.
It would also ensure that small PCBUs apply suitable
control measures to these critical risks.
This is particularly important, noting that critical risks are those that are
likely to result in a death or a significant injury or illness or an
occupational hazard. We are concerned that by leaving it to small
PCBUs to, once identifying these critical risks, to then
apply their own risk management framework to this without the requirement to
apply those high-level controls, we'll simply see the same situation we
have already.
Small businesses relying on things such as signage, PPE,
hard hats, not actual things that remove the risk to the
extent possible from the workplace.
We submit this is consistent with the purpose of the Health and Safety at Work
Act and the proposed new Clause 3, subsection 3 of the bill, which
reinforces the importance of worker health and safety by calling for the
highest level of protection, and so far as reasonably practicable.
We also have concerns with the introduction of differentiated regime for small
PCBUs and how it is intended to operate a multi-PCBU
workplace. I know you would have heard a lot of this already so far,
but without clear articulation of how these duties are to interact in these
scenarios, if I could be frank, we will continue to be busy as lawyers in the
space.
There is a real risk of inconsistent allocation of responsibility, disputes
between duty holders, small PCBUs being overburdened, and you'll
have insufficient connection in your safety systems on these large workplaces.
And these are talking about manufacturing, construction, transportation.
These are these key areas where workers are killed and maimed.
On that basis, we recommend that explicit guidance be provided on how duties are
intended to operate when you have multiple PCBUs in this
situation, specifically clarification of those upstream and downstream
obligations
and/or an expressive legislative provision or/and guidance that the
small PCBU framework does not allow those PCBUs in
contracting chains to require higher safety standards within
and to integrate small PCBUs into those site-wide or project-wide safety
systems.
Back to Mr. Furlong.
In terms of the approved codes of practice, we support the bill's
proposal to elevate approved codes of practice to safe harbor
status. We've heard some submissions around the
fact that the regulations that were intended to come in under the
legislation haven't happened, and there is certainly, in our opinion, a
lack of guidance,
and assistance to PCBUs in terms of understanding and
meeting their duties.
In our view, this reform has the potential to materially improve certainty for
duty holders, reduce adversarial engagement with the
regulator, and support more consistent safety
outcomes across various sectors.
Properly implemented, and we do stress properly implemented, safe
harboring gives the PCBUs confidence that if they follow an
approved code of practice, they will be treated as having met their
duties.
However, in our submission, the effectiveness of safe harboring
will depend heavily on the quality, robustness, and clarity
of the ACOF framework. We see that as really
essential.
So our recommendations
include several targeted refinements.
First, we recommend a staged process for existing approved codes of
practice,
with a clear pathway to transitioning suitable codes to that
safe harbor status.
This would avoid unnecessary disruption and ensure continuity for
sectors that rely heavily on established ACOFs
And secondly, we recommend great clarity around the regulator's
role in reviewing and recommending ACOPS, and we're aware that
that's a theme through some of the other submissions that have been put forward.
That role would be clearly focused on technical accuracy,
worker safety, which is paramount, and practical workability,
rather than broader policy considerations.
In our opinion, this will support confidence in the approval process and in the
status of ACOPS as safe harbors. Finally,
we recommend transparency around how conflicts between
ACOPS or between ACOPS and other guidance are to be
resolved. That will be essential.
Clear expectations in this area are essential if safe harboring is to
deliver genuine certainty rather than just creating new
ambiguities.
Taken together, we would see these refinements as strengthening confidence in the
ACOP regime and maximizing the benefits of safe
harboring while remaining aligned with the policy intent of the
bill.
Those conclude our submissions, and thank you for hearing them.
Right. Thank you. We have a long lineup of questions we might have to send to you
after this because we haven't got a lot of time.
But quick question from me was, do you think that the small
PCBU definition,
like you've identified with working with larger or smaller
contractors, would prohibit their ability to be agile in a
marketplace in terms of the way that they're geared up?
Yeah, I do think so. So two points on that.
First of all, we didn't touch on that definition of a small PCBU.
Mm.
But given that fluctuation every nine months, and we're talking about
Northland Corridor, where you're going to have PCBUs tunnel in and
out and there for years of time. So first of all, who is a small--
are they a small PCBU? When are they going to flip between that
status? And then at the same time, how do you capture that in your health and
safety system to ensure that you are actually, everyone is
managing the risks to the standard required and not having small independents pop
in and pop out? That is definitely an area of concern for us.
And do you think there's a workability of high-risk industry
carve-outs versus-- well, low-risk industry carve-outs,
rather?
Yes, and I think that's where Schedule 1 already, Schedule 1A creates that-
Mm
... that good work, and we're really pleased with that because that's essentially
taken every high hazard in those industries, put them into one
list.
Mm.
We're grateful for that, not having to go through and identify them anymore.
But yeah, why couldn't we go further on that and say, "We'll be recognizing the
significant harm that will arise from that." Probably have to keep the status
around it.
Thank you. And
the next question I have from Parmjeet.
Yeah.
Very succinct, and then we'll-
Thank you
... see if we can send the follow-up questions.
Yeah. So the ultimate goal here is to ensure that small businesses are
not doing that tick boxing compliance.
So what you're proposing, how do you kind of provide that balance
in what you are saying should be happening? How do you see that balance?
So the balance here is that even with the tick box compliance
or something like that, you still have room to maneuver in here to determine what
that is. We haven't even talked about what likely is, and that's a fun
definition. But if you're leaving it down to a small PCBU to say, "Well, we think
on the balance of probabilities that this is one of our critical risks," and they
can pick and choose what that is, they can then go pick and choose how they want to
manage that. And we think that provides a real gambit there for
ambiguity, and essentially to be able to ignore some risks or pick
which risks favor you, and then apply what control measures you want to be able to
do to it. So yes, we want to get away from tick box, but at the same
time,
we don't want to be in a situation where you can essentially game that
and work to your advantage and just apply the lowest level control measure to suit
your business profitability.
Thank you. Thank you very much. We may have some follow-up questions for you-
Please. Thank you
... that we'll send through via the secretariat.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
We'll move on now to Safer Farms.
We have Lindy Nelson and Natalie Bowey.
Bowey?
Stop.
Thank you. We have 10 minutes with you, and that includes time for questions.
Over to you.
Kia ora, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Natalie Bowey, and I'm the acting CEO of Safer Farms.
Tena koutou katoa. I
am a farmer.
I'm a director of Safer Farms, and I'm the sector's Farm Without Harm
ambassador. Safer Farms is a member-based
organization solely focused on reducing the
unacceptable high harm rates of injury and fatality in the
agricultural sector. As kaitiaki of Farm Without
Harm strategy, we work closely with farmers and industry to
provide practical tools, education, and resources.
Farm Without Harm is the very first whole-of-sector
strategy and agreed plan to address high harm in
agriculture. It brings together industry, farmers,
workers, iwi, and the wider community.
Nga mihi for the opportunity. Our submission is five minutes long, and
we welcome questions. I'd like to acknowledge Mark Butterick
as our local MP.
Good to see you.
There are parts of the bill we support, in particular, the greater clarity
around recreational access and the elevation of ACOPS, provided
these are properly funded. The majority of farms in New Zealand are
small PCBUs, and many operate day-to-day alongside larger
PCBUs in paddocks, wool sheds, stockyards, and the milking
shed. From our perspective, some aspects of the proposed
amendments risk creating more ambiguity rather than clarity.
We're mindful that agriculture remains a sector with many risks.
Many small PCBUs are not yet adequately controlling risks, and
legislative ambiguity will not helpThis concern is
reinforced by feedback from our members, who when asked whether the bill will make
health and safety simpler for their businesses, many said no, and
others were unsure.
There is broad agreement in the farming community that focusing on critical risks
is a sensible place to start. But we believe there are significant
caveats.
The current proposed definition of likely is problematic, as it is very
subjective and the threshold appears high.
Our concern is that one farm may interpret what is likely very differently
from the next, leading to inconsistent levels of protection across the sector.
As a farmer, I want to understand clearly what is going to
hurt someone, what counts as a critical risk, and what
I need to do about it. Under the proposed changes, I still
need to document what I believe is likely to cause serious harm
and what controls I will then put in place.
Yet, if my farm employs fewer than
20 people, I may have fewer obligations to train or
control those risks
I personally don't classify as critical, even though the risk
itself has not changed. I've been farming for 38 years,
and I've witnessed the loss of life and devastating injury from quad
bikes. On our farm, we have identified quad bikes
as a critical risk. As a result, all our bikes
have crush protection device, helmets are mandatory,
and we have beacons.
If my neighbor who farms similar terrain, but due to his
experiences and his beliefs, does not see
quad bikes as likely to cause harm,
therefore uses no protective controls.
We have two farms, side by side, facing the same
risks, but completely different interpretations of what is
likely to cause harm.
We're equally concerned about the two-tier approach to
PCBUs. By carving out small PCBUs and only
expecting them to focus on what they deem as critical risks, additional
complexity is being introduced, not removed.
Farming operations are often multi-PCBU environments, and our
survey respondents had concerns about both small contractors on large
farms and the inverse.
We've heard from a number of members who are large PCBUs, which provide
services on farm. They're concerned about what this means for them
and their workers. They are asking who is responsible for what from a
health and safety perspective if they're operating with different expectations in
the same environment. There are plenty of examples in our sector where workers
from large PCBUs are working alongside those on a farm, yet there'll
be different levels of protection for those individuals simply because of who
they are employed by, which is inequitable.
Staff turnover is high and agriculture is high, and many staff move farms and
employment due to multiple reasons.
If workers are moving between large and small farms or large and small
agriculture service businesses, there is concern about differing
expectations and what this may mean, particularly for small PCBUs
looking to employ staff.
Let me give you a practical example.
Imagine a shepherd moving from a large farming business to a smaller
one as an opportunity to progress her career.
In her current role, she has access to well-maintained vehicles for the
train, helmet for quad bike use, and a personal locator beacon.
She moves to a smaller farm, doing essentially the same
job in the same terrain with the same risks,
but without those protections because the farm has fewer legal
obligations to identify those risks.
She understands what good safety systems look like, but she is now in
the uncomfortable position, wanting to maintain safe
practices, yet constrained by an employer with reduced
responsibilities under the law.
We are also concerned about unintended economic consequences.
Injuries do not disappear simply because they're classified as non-critical, as
you've heard today. Since the Health and Safety at Work Act was introduced, we've
seen injury rates decrease on our farms.
However, last year alone, there were around 16,000 ACC claims
in agriculture, the majority of which would likely fall outside the proposed
critical risk definition. Those injuries resulted in an average
of 37 days off work. The lost productivity is
already significant, and increasing injury rates will inevitably
drive ACC levies higher for farmers and cost our country
more. It's a false economy to reduce expectations on farms of
any size when it comes to managing health and safety risks.
A far better way to support small businesses is through strong, practical,
industry-led ACOPS. There are currently two agriculture ACOPS
being drafted at the moment. They are being developed and revised
largely through goodwill of our sector.
One health and safety expert has contributed more than 50 hours of unpaid
time reviewing these drafts. This is simply not sustainable.
If ACOPS are to play a meaningful role, they must be properly resourced to ensure
they're credible, robust, and fit for purpose.
Finally, we'd like to note potential implications of New Zealand's free trade
agreements. While we're not trade policy experts, we believe
analysis should be undertaken to ensure these amendments do not
inadvertently put our $62 billion agricultural
export sector at risk. Thank you for the opportunity to present
today. We're happy to take questions.
Thank you. A question from Phil Whitehead.
Why do you think the farm sector is so often
quoted as a source
of commentary that the current health and safety system is not fit
for purpose and should be weakened for smaller business?
Could you expand on that question? I'm not-- I don't really understand it.
So the farm sector
is always quoted
as an industry that doesn't like the health and safety system,
finds it not fit for purpose, impractical,
unnecessarily burdensomeYou're from that
sector. Why do you think the agricultural sector is always
quoted?
I think there's a difference between the understanding of what is
required of farmers and the practical application
of the act. So we are a low
mature sector in terms of health and safety
practices.
Mm-hmm.
And there actually are a lot of support out there in terms of
apps that actually make it quite easy to document.
I'd also add to that. I think it's more the confusion around what is
expected.
Yep.
And we're not sure that this is the right avenue to do that.
You've heard today from a lot of others around the regulation that was meant
to occur. The two ACOPS are a great start-
Mm
... for our sector. So I think farmers in the wider
sector are looking for that guidance, that education,
that extension piece. So yes, we are often
possibly in the media and saying these things, but it's because we want to
understand what is expected of us.
It's that complexity that's there.
I'm not convinced that what we're seeing is going to
reduce that complexity.
So you think it's a failure of communication and engagement and guidance
as the source of the problem?
Well, there's a lot of things that were promised with regulations and
ACOPS that haven't come about.
Right.
So you could say that that is a failure.
Yep.
And we look forward to actually seeing
the ACOPS actually come into effect, that will actually support our sector
to be more safe on the farm.
Do you think that this bill, if it's passed as drafted, would lead to
fewer or more fatalities and injuries on New Zealand farms?
I believe more,
particularly in that example I gave you of if you-
Mm-hmm
... see the risk as likely-
Yep
... and therefore put the controls in place, versus if you see it as unlikely
and don't put the controls in place.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. That's all the time we have for you today.
Thank you very much. Thanks.
Appreciate your contribution, and being part of this process.
We move to-
Interesting
... ear two, Carina Browne, who is joining us via Zoom.
Nope.
Welcome, Carina.
Hi, welcome. Thank you for having me.
You are so welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions, although you know this .
Over to you. The time is yours to use as you wish.
Sure.
So, I always work on the assumption that you've read the submission, and I
prefer to actually take a lot of questions.
So I'm just going to highlight a couple of the points that we see as important.
So, for us, a bit like the previous submitter,
the issue around critical risk is becoming that as a priority
without having proper definition is a real concern to us,
because that whole thing around the likely, as was mentioned before.
And it also because it's such a fundamental shift from the main purpose
of what the Health and Safety Act was around and how it came about, which as you
would've heard earlier from the Pike River people, that came out from them.
It came out of that horrible disaster that occurred in New Zealand,
around Pike River. And the previous legislation
that this is to replace, we felt was working well.
We talked to employers, and we felt that it was actually doing its job,
but just needed some tweaks, rather than a complete rewrite that this tends
to do by changing the main focus.
And what really concerns us, again, what was talked
about by the farming sector was that we're now actually creating
a two-tier system where the value of a person's life
changes depending how many workers are in a workplace.
Because those who are actually
in a large workplace have a lot of structure in place,
actually have to actually mitigate all health and safety, even if they
prioritize the critical risk. But those with less than
20 only have to prioritize critical risk.
And that is a real concern to us because, we know there's a number of small
quarries out there. There's a lot of small mines out there, that are
less than 20 people. And to actually not actually have them have normal health and
safety really worries us because our
members who are miners know how disastrous it can be.
And anything can go suddenly from not being a critical risk to being a critical
risk, just by somebody actually digging into an area and
suddenly the wall collapses.
So if there's not been the mitigation there, then it's actually
these things can occur, but even small injuries, that the people might
call a small injury, can actually be really damaging for a person for their
ongoing and changing of life for them if they actually end up with
nerves cut or something in their arm.
Which isn't critical risk, for those small workers, but it actually still
has a major impact on their life. So to actually say that
you're working this factory, but we're actually going to have to worry about doing
things like proper guards and all that because you're suddenly 20 years, because
we're going to have to worry about the fact you're not going to get eaten by the
machine compared to someone who's more than 20, where they're going to have all the
guards in place, have the health and safety practices in place, because they
actually have to focus on all health and safety even though there's a priority of
critical risk. And to us, that differentiation is
really problematic.
And also, again, like the previous submitter, we really have concern around
how old a lot of the ACOPS are. And to
enable an ACOP to actually then mitigate a person's liability
because they said, "Well, we followed the ACOP." But if it's so
outdated that it doesn't protect anyone, then it shouldn't be used
as a reason to be able to mitigate
liability. And
to actually enable lobby groups, or industry just to
actually create their own ACOPS and put them up suddenly to
be-Passed.
Really does have to concern when you're not actually
have the worker's voice included in them.
Yes, part of the legislation then requires them to go out, but we
also know that how little changes when something goes out for
consultation, because all the work's been done, and it's not had a worker's
voice there. So we do believe there's a need for a worker's voice to be included,
even if industry's coming up with this, the ACOP.
There must be a requirement that they still have to include a worker's voice in
that decision-making, rather than just
being able to do it on their own without any input.
So they're the main three things we wanted to raise.
As I said, we do have concerns with the change in the priority
around critical risk. But yeah, aside from that, I'm
open for questions and hopefully give you some time back depending how many there
are.
Thank you very much, Corinna. You will. And we have a question from Dan Rosewarne.
Kia ora, Corinna.
I've asked this question-
Congratulations and welcome.
Thank you. Thank you. I asked this question of a previous submitter
as well. What's troubling for me is that the bill,
in my view, there's no consequence for businesses that do not
prioritize critical risks. And I just want to get a
sense of what you think could be done to the bill to
improve
the drafting of the bill so critical risks are
prioritized by businesses.
I suppose I can really flip that over.
In fact, it's not so much
about... Because for us,
every worker should be able to go to work and be safe.
So by actually enabling to prioritize critical
risk over other health and safety, so even if we actually say
they can make and get away from not actually, if they don't do the critical risk
analysis properly,
our concern is that they should be doing a whole health and safety process
properly.
And by actually then being able to move it away just to critical risks to look at
that and still not do it properly is really going to endanger people.
But it shouldn't be that priority.
The priority should be on
saying to people, "If they go to work, they will do everything we can to ensure you
come home safely."
By saying we're going to prioritize critical risk, basically says, "You
come to work, it's okay if you break your leg.
It's okay if you need some stitches because you've cut your
arm. As long as you're not dead or seriously maimed, you're
okay."
And
then to have someone come up and say, "Okay, now we're going to charge you because
you didn't actually mitigate this critical risk,"
it's the horse before the cart. You shouldn't put the horse before the cart.
We should be saying that everyone
needs to be safe,
yet we do have a priority, but the reality is there should be no difference.
The main priority should always be the focus, should be everyone who goes to
work, there should be everything done for them to come home safely.
And we need to actually say, okay. And if we do need to say, these are the risks we
could have, an employer could actually list those out, fine,
but the penalty should be that we didn't actually protect all our workers,
not just someone from being dead.
Lives matter.
And it's not just about whether you actually die, it's whether you have your
life-changing injury, which isn't a critical risk.
And that worries us because at least in the current
act, without that prioritization, employers have to
actually do this whole process. They have to actually look at mitigating all these
issues, not just critical ones. So I suppose that's where I differ from you
saying, how can we make it better for the critical risk?
Thing is how we can make it better for everyone to actually go to work and be safe,
and let's not decide what the size of your workplace is to decide whether you're
safe or not. Because that's the other problem is that those small employers who
might not necessarily do critical risk right, get no problems anyway for anything
that wasn't critical risk.
And that is also a concern.
Thank you very much, Corinna. Appreciate your participation in the
process.
No worries.
We'll move on now to Dave Tilton, Parallax Limited.
Thanks for joining us. You've got 10 minutes with us.
That includes time for questions. It's over to you how you use it.
Thank you, and appreciate the opportunity to speak.
And I'm going to leave as much of that time for questions as I can.
Great.
And ideally, maybe focus on the areas of tension that you have,
which would be the most productive.
Very briefly, and I won't repeat my submission, but my background
is in the area of roadwork safety, work zone safety, temporary
traffic management, which has certainly received plenty of air time and
scrutiny over the last while.
But it's very connected to this particular subject.
Overarching, the Health and Safety at Work Act has a significant role to
play in how that sector performs its functions.
And also, the temporary traffic management sector is going through quite a
significant evolution and change to adopt a risk-based
approach. Now, in theory, that sounds really cool, but it's also
a challenging concept philosophically as well as practically and
operationally. So this bill certainly intersects with that quite
considerably.
And my background is useful in a few ways.
One is obviously being at the frontline and front edge of that transition,
assisting with things like policy and training and
operationalization of some of those theories.
I'm doing a PhD in risk at the University of Canterbury,
so there is an intersection there between risk science and how it shows up in
areas like this.
And then thirdly, I've recently done quite a lot of work with the World Road
Association on how work zone safety is performed across the globe,
and what those systems and structures and legislative instruments are that play a
part in how the function is performed.
I'm going to focus on, very quickly, three areas.
You've probably heard a lot today, and I'm going to try not to repeat some of that.
I've listened to some of the live stream, and I'll try not to hammer home the
same key points. One of them is critical risk. I'm not going to go there.
You've heard heapsSo the three I'll pick, one is
around the adjacent legislation.
So there's a
provision there to say that adjacent legislation can take some load
where it
is already establishing an expectation, and that deems
compliance.
An example that I heard was around logbook hours.
But one of the challenges with that approach is that there
isn't a census of all of those other provisions that
would intersect. And so that would be an absolutely crucial piece of work to
do because we're asking other legislation that was not
designed in its primary purpose to carry that load.
It may be of a different quality or a different standard, or carry
the levels of expectation quite differently.
I'll drag up one example, which is Section 353 of the Local Government Act,
which expects and in effect applies to all local government,
but also applies to NZTA. The Government Roading Powers Act
steals that clause as well, and it basically says that the roading
authority is responsible for making sure things are safe on the road when they're
done.
Now, you could argue that that therefore carries some load from a health and safety
perspective if it was to be invoked in place of the Health and Safety at Work
Act and/or this bill,
once implemented.
So that other sort of adjacent legislation piece,
I feel like has got some serious work to be done on, because it's
a big black box of we don't know where that would go.
The second key point I'd want to talk about very briefly is the contracting
chain. So,
work zones and any roadwork and construction has
a long contracting chain right from a client, might be NZTA, it might be
utilities. It flows all the way through to many, many
subcontractors. And as soon as we consider the
20 plus or minus
number of workers, then you've got a contracting chain that has
different degrees of accountability based on those
organization sizes in the same contracting chain.
So a large contractor then has to figure out how those
subcontractors with a different threshold of risk management requirement
would fit within their contracting chain, who are all now working on the same
environment. You could have two adjacent contractors in exactly the same workplace
that would have different obligations.
That's a challenge for not just the lead contractor, but the client who's
overseeing that health and safety framework.
The third and last point I'll make is around philosophy.
I see within this bill,
or we go back to the original philosophy of the health and safety system
that we have, Robin-style, coming from the UK.
It's centered around so far as reasonably practicable.
The idea that you are chasing
a
standard of continuous improvement, that if there's more you could do, you
should be looking for that. It's not to say you have to do it, but it's saying you
should be looking for it.
In some cases, this bill inserts
a place where you can rest and say, "I've done enough."
The concept of ACOPS and
how they establish deemed compliance,
same in those adjacent legislation concepts.
And what that does is inserts
certainty where there is none in real life.
There is not certainty of that thing being effective.
And if you unwind that philosophy of the entire
act as it stands by inserting deemed compliance, then those two
things for me are incongruent. So there has to be a way to reconcile
that because it's not matching the philosophy of the overarching
act in its current form. And that's me.
Happy to chat through maybe if there's key areas of tension or if those ones are,
then great.
Can I just say impressive?
Because you've just gone straight to the point, and we've got lots of time for
questions, and it's very clear and helpful. So kal mates.
Great. Thanks, Chair.
Take the example of multiple contractors-
Sure
... understanding.
Isn't there an opportunity for the market to then say, "If you want to work on this
site, these are the standards," as happens across subcontractors,
across a range of the trades?
Yep, sure. The market might decide that, and
so there's a pro and a con.
Yeah.
The
market decides who wins that work maybe, and how
they
put forward the commercial offering, and it's going to be based on whatever costs
they're going to incur to meet some form of standard.
But the client has to set the risk appetite to start with.
So the client has to establish what are we willing to pay for, or
actually broadly, society sets that risk appetite.
When we talk about the health and safety legislative framework, is actually a
society saying, "This is kind of how much harm we're willing to
push towards. How much resources are we willing to apply to this particular
problem?" And so the Health and Safety at Work Act does that to start with.
And so then the contracting chain has to interpret that to go,
"What level of risk appetite are we going to accept?"
So I get that. I suppose the point I'm asking
is already in construction and in contracting,
there are additional requirements that are set by
contractors or by clients based on their circumstances, and the
same could occur
in relation to this point of small and large
PCBUs.
You're right. So a large contractor could establish a blanket expectation
across all
organizations
who work with them in the contracting chain.
Correct.
If that small contractor has to then work in that higher
stakes environment where there's more expectations, they'll choose not to, they'll
go somewhere else.
Not necessarily.
Because they already do it on other fronts.
At the moment, though, there isn't a two-tiered system.
Mm.
Correct.
Yeah.
But there are other requirements that contractors put on in relation
to, for example, if you're working at the prison,
you've got expectations and a small plumbing firm that's part of that contracting
chain says, "Okay, I'll opt into that-"
Yeah. Correct
... in order to get the work.
Yep. That is obviously based on a risk assessment, because those
expectations are seeking to address a risk.
This is not addressing a risk, it's addressing a...
Well, this comes from a two-tiered system that generates a
difference in expectation that's not based on a risk assessment.
That's saying the same risk
does not affect these two organizations the same, but logically it does because
it's agnostic to those organizations, isn't it?
Mm-hmm. A question from Pamjit Palmer.
Oh, yes. Thank you. So my question is about
how you're saying the critical risk needs to be defined, and you
have mentioned in your submission that it should be probability consequence
metrics. And so just want to understand from you.
So if something has not happened in the past, but it could be still a critical
risk, so how would you put that in this context the way you have
described in your submission?
Everything to do with risk assessment is trying to predict the future.
So you cannot say for certain-
Sometimes the probability, for probability, you also look at
if it has happened in the past, isn't it? So that doesn't diminish it.
That's one way. Yep.
It might be-
One way is looking at its historical.
But the absence of something going wrong is not the prison, so
you cannot necessarily project forward from those past events.
My point around consequence is that likelihood is entirely
based on whether something may or may not happen, not how bad it might
be, and the likelihood of a certain consequence is also an important
intersecting-
Yeah. So the consequence occurring
... consideration. Take a plane. What's the likelihood that the landing gear won't
come down?
Mm-hmm.
It's actually ridiculously low. So it's not likely at all.
But is it critical?
Mm-hmm.
Or actually, at the moment, the bill would not probably be able
to... It's far too ambiguous in how it's using that word for that to be
answered.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
My pleasure.
Really helpful and
submission. We'll move on to Community Law
Centres Aotearoa, who are on Zoom.
And we have Rupert O'Brien joining us.
Kia ora.
Kia ora, Rupert. You have 10 minutes, as an
organization, includes time for questions.
Over to you how you utilize that. Thank you.
Mm-hmm. Kia ora. Kia ora koutou. My name is Rupert O'Brien.
I am one of the law reform coordinators for Community Law Centres
Aotearoa, which is the peak body for all the community law centers.
All 24 community law centers belong to
CLCA.
So we speak on behalf of all of the law centers, and the lawyers who
work there.
Employment is regularly one of our largest areas of work.
So in 2025, we saw over 6,500 employment matters
across community law centers. And for employment issues,
our law centers generally see,
and represent, and advise employees at small,
non-unionized workplaces, which are the group that are most affected by
some of the sections of this bill.
And so we have serious concerns about the system splitting
small and large businesses out with different requirements, as has been kind
of repeatedly addressed today. It's one of the major
concerns that all the submitters have brought up is that
risk in workplace doesn't align with the size of
an employer. It aligns with
the nature of the work undertaken.
And we also see that employees and small businesses already struggle
to raise issues that they have with any health and safety concerns
because there's no HR at a small...
Well, generally there's no HR, there's no one to go to.
The employer is the one who's telling you to take the risk or not putting the
safety in place. There's no one else to go talk to, so it's really
difficult for employees at small businesses to bring these issues
to the fore. And it's our experience that
when we tell people, "Well, look, your only other option other than talking
directly to your employer if they're not listening, raising a PG is to
go to WorkSafe," is nothing, basically.
Our experience of WorkSafe as the regulator is that it
appears that they are not resourced to proactively investigate
issues that are raised, especially with issues around
non-life-threatening risk, which is
the other issue that's been raised.
There's a serious risk.
Well, critical risk. There's serious issues with the critical risks
system,
and the lack of certainty that
will be given rise by these changes.
You've heard again and again from legal experts and
from industry experts, and from individuals in industry today
that they're not sure what that means, that it doesn't provide any kind of
certainty. The whole point of this bill is supposed to be to try and provide
additional certainty,
and this critical risks
system that has been introduced doesn't do that.
We've got concerns that you might see some employers,
seeking to minimize compliance costs, may downplay.
They may reclassify their own risks,
to be outside of the definition of critical risks.
It's very difficult to work out
what is meant in the bill by likely, what is a critical risk and how
does likely play into that.
And so whenever there's a gray area, we will see some
employers choosing to downplay or downgrade
their requirements when it comes to them because there's a chance they can say,
"Oh, this wasn't critical risk," or, "It's not likely."
And what we don't want to see is WorkSafe
having-To come back around after someone gets
injured and after someone dies, to do prosecutions after that.
I think the whole point that everyone would want to see is that
these risks are avoided entirely and that people don't get hurt and nobody
gets prosecuted.
Beyond the meaning and the difficulties with definitions, we see that
this bill seeks to diminish the focus on high occurrence and regularly
occurring injuries like musculoskeletal issues, occupational diseases,
long-term exposures,
and especially work-related mental health concerns and
psychosocial harms.
And excluding these categories of harm ignores significant risks
faced by many workers and undermines the whole purpose of the Health and Safety at
Work Act. Cumulative injuries, including sprains and strains,
represent a substantial proportion of workplace harm and ACC claims across the
country. And the thing that has been pointed out by a number of
submitters is that these injuries can still be life-altering.
They can still mean that somebody cannot go to work, that they are permanently on
welfare or on ACC for the rest of their life,
which is obviously a cost on the system.
But we are the people who see those people, they come through our door and they
come to say,
"I've been injured. My doctor said they're not sure when I'm going to get back to
work. I'm off on ACC and my employer is now saying
they're inviting me to a meeting to say they're going to medically terminate me."
And they will medically terminate them.
There will be no personal agreements or other way that we can get that person
any kind of compensation or improvement for their life, and
they will be then off, and whether they get ACC or not is not
a certainty, and they'll be then off work for a long time or forever.
And so
non-critical risks causing harm
are serious. They can cause serious problems for people's mental health as well as
people's physical health.
What the consultation showed, and what a number of submitters have said today, is
that they need more support from the regulator, laying out their obligations and
best practice to support safety and give certainty.
What we see, again, from our perspective as a regulator who is already not
resourced to support employers who want and need support, and it is not
inspecting employers who are avoiding or not meeting obligations to ensure
safety proactively, which was the concern and the issue that...
It's hard to go beyond the Pike River mine and the
submitters from this morning.
It was the lack of proactive investigation that caused that, and the regulator
isn't doing that enough, and we don't see it.
It's our opinion that the approach needed to protect life and limb and to
enable businesses to operate confidently would be to ensure that there is a
properly resourced regulator who can provide codes of conduct, best practice
systems and proactive inspections.
I'd also just quickly mention a concern that we've raised about the
possible industry ACOPS. While it's been submitted that ACOPS will be useful
for guidance,
we've repeatedly heard today that the regulator is not properly resourced, and
so we see a serious risk that codes could be presented to the regulator who are not
having the resources to review them, and critically make
changes to them or just accept them and promo back them.
I'll just quickly go through that because of the nature of our work, we see
people regularly who are placed at risk while at work, and we see the outcomes for
workers who have been injured, who have suffered physical or mental injuries.
We see workers who have suffered injuries at work and are then dismissed for being
unable to work and will have their lives permanently altered by what they
experienced. And we do not see WorkSafe already making
a difference to those people who work in small, non-unionized workplaces who will
be covered by that second tier of less obligation.
That's probably enough from me. I'll leave
time for questions if there are any.
Thank you very much, Rupert. It doesn't appear that we have any questions from the
committee, but that's not a reflection of a lack of interest.
You've clearly covered every point in your written and oral submission.
So thank you for being with us today, participating in the process.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Away from Phil. See ya.
We'll move on now to the Outdoor Access Commission.
We have Jeff Holgate online.
Jeff, if you could turn on your
camera and audio, we can
hear from you.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Jeff.
Um-
We have 10 minutes with you, and that includes time for questions.
Thank you.
So it's all yours. Go for it.
Once again, good afternoon, Madam Chair and members of the committee.
My name is Jeff Holgate. I'm the regional field advisor, or a
regional field advisor with the Outdoor Access Commission here
in our Nuku Aotearoa,
and the presentation is on behalf of the commission.
You will have read that the commission is the Crown agent responsible for improving
and protecting outdoor public access.
Our governing piece of legislation is the Walking Access Act,
and the primary purpose of which is to protect and
enhance free, certain, and enduring practical access to the
outdoors.
Our submission is very succinct and limited in its
scope.
So I'd just like to start by referring to the Federated Farmers
submission this morning,
where I heard David Burkett mention that farmers' confusion
about their responsibilities under the
Health and Safety Act,
produced...
Sorry, their confusion and fear of getting it
wrong under the act had restricted access,
and that's very much our experience as well.
A number of cases where misunderstanding of land managers'
responsibility for the health and safety
requirements has resulted in many, or quite a
lot of access being denied to the New Zealand
publicNow, apart from supporting some
aspects of the bill,
our written submission focuses on Clause 14, the proposed
changes to Section 37 of the act.
Even with those proposed amendments, we believe that in rural
settings, there may still be room for some misunderstanding.
Although the concept of a workplace is quite difficult to
grasp
in rural setting as opposed to an industrial setting.
So, in farming and forestry, for example, work can
occur virtually on all of the property at a number
of times.
So some PCBUs interpret that to mean
that the farm or forest is always a workplace, and
therefore,
they close it off to access because they believe they have
responsibilities under the Health and Safety Act.
Even the definition of a worker has been questioned.
For example, it's been suggested that cows and calves grazing a
paddock could be- ... considered to be workers for the
PCBU.
Therefore, the PCBU has responsibilities under Section
37 (1) of the act, and public access has been refused on that
basis because the PCBU believes it could be
liable for any accident that occurred.
We strongly support further clarification that
PCBUs who manage or control a workplace that
includes recreational spaces
do not owe the
Section 37 duties to those lawfully accessing the
land for recreational purposes, unless work is
being undertaken in that proximity.
In most cases, we're talking about people simply walking across the
land
for recreation, or to get to a place of
recreation.
We don't believe the term open space in Section
14 (2) of the bill is appropriate.
Open space has got many different interpretations.
For example, would you consider a forest an open space?
I don't think many people instinctively would.
We've suggested other wording in our submission, which you will of course have
seen.
We believe additional clarity can
further be provided
in Section 14 (2) of the bill by including the
words "by a worker."
Now, it may seem like a bit of duplication, given the meaning of
worker in the act as someone who carries out work.
Mm.
But it would emphasize that for work to occur,
a worker must be present.
It's one of the difficulties we have in a lot of rural settings, is
people
don't realize that a worker has to be present to
undertake work.
As I said, our submission is reasonably straightforward and succinct, and if
there are any questions, I'd be very happy to answer them.
Thank you, Jeff. You are right. It was.
Do we have any questions from the committee?
It doesn't appear we do, Jeff, but I've reiterated this before, just a lack of
questions is not a lack of interest.
A very helpful submission, and you've well covered everything for us, so we
appreciate you participating in the process.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Right. We will now move into private session,
so just any officials are welcome to stay in the room, obviously, but any public
members of the please,
take your leave. Thank you.